good afternoon how's the show going for
y'all good looks like we got another
very pretty good crowd here today my
name is Barry Janssen buried Toolman
Janssen and welcome to tool time we're
going to go over the web objects tools
today before I do that though I've got
some good news and some bad news the bad
news is that I don't talk as fast as
earning proper curb and I'm not as funny
nor do I demo as quick as Steve Heymann
that's the bad news
the good news is that Ernie told me that
we could give away a titanium laptop
with web objects on edge and the way
we're gonna give it away is and this is
all the standard disclaimers please
didn't invoke all the standard
disclaimers and this is a joke okay but
what we're gonna do is we're gonna count
to three and when I say three the first
one to stand up is gonna get the laptop
okay so here we go everybody's seated
please one two okay now that I've got
your attention let's talk about tools
the trickiest part of this presentation
is gonna be trying to get through it
without using this number otherwise it's
gonna cost me so we're going to talk
about web objects tools today if I can
there we go so here's what you're going
to learn we're going to go over this
session is an introduction to tools
there are many other sessions that go
into tools in greater depth but we're
going to we're going to go over the
tools that web objects developers will
use in building a typical application
we'll build a very basic application
more specifically we're going to build
an application that uses direct to web
as a starting point along the way we'll
expose all the tools that
typically in the web objects developers
Arsenal and will also expose some of the
things that are new in web objects 5 a
little bit of project builder in that so
for some of you I know that will be will
be quite new so what are the tools if
you go online and you read web objects
tools and techniques you'll see that
there are three oh I made it five
minutes okay you'll see that there is
this trilogy there's this trilogy of
tools in project builder remodeler and
web objects builder okay if you go
somewhere else on the web if you look in
Ernie's free in there in Ernie's
presentation if you look at tools and
techniques it actually adds direct to
web in there and doesn't talk as much
about project builder okay so what are
the tools we always kind of refer to
those three but there's two others we'd
like to talk to you about today as well
and that's direct to web assistant and
direct to Java client assistant okay and
those are tools that allow us to rapidly
build these direct to web and direct to
Java client applications and direct to
web it's a Java applet that connects up
to your running application and modifies
it indirect to Java client it's a swing
UI can interface with a connection to
modify your swing UI applications that
are based on web objects so we'll talk
about five today okay
first of all the tasks I'll go over the
tasks that we're going to go through so
if you're a new developer this is really
targeted at you but what we want to do
is start from easiest to hardest a lot
of times we come out here when systems
engineers when we go out and do
demonstrations on web objects it's a
tremendously powerful and flexible set
of frameworks and powerful tools that go
with it and a lot of times we go very
broad and very wide and very deep very
quickly and we lose a lot of people okay
so we're going to kind of go through a
process here that isn't too hard to get
started
mean if you're not a rich experience
what about its developer that's been
doing this for years and years you
should feel a place right right at home
during this presentation if you are an
experienced web objects developer and
perhaps you haven't seen some of these
other technologies or use these other
technologies extensively my guess is you
know a manager or you know somebody you
work with who asks you about web objects
and you get the idea that maybe they're
not going to drill to the depths of
insert objects into both sides of
relationships with key in relationship
with key and so they need something a
little easier to get started with once
they're started you can help them out or
you can call a police services and we'll
help you out
so there's lots of places to get help
once you get started on web objects but
the trick is to get you started so
that's what our goal is with those
technologies okay nice okay so the tasks
are project builder we're going to start
a new project we'll look at what is
involved in the project where do things
go how do we handle them we'll compile a
project project builder does this for
you we'll set some runtime parameters
show you where that is it's a little
different in the new project builder and
it will launch the application director
web will launch the director web
assistant will customize both tasks and
entities with the director web assistant
and then we'll save and make changes on
the fly if some of you saw Scott
Forstall in the keynote you see you saw
one of the hallmarks to our way of
developing technology and that is when
you have live object systems you can do
some pretty cool things dynamically on
the fly and that's what we're going to
try and do today
well objects builder we're going to take
some standard components to come in our
application we're going to modify those
a little bit Steve did Steve Heymann
yesterday in
section 601 went over this quite a bit
yesterday so we won't go too into it
quite as much as he did in their other
sessions as well so you'll mod ler we'll
talk about EO modeler and what it does
first we have to explain what a Neal
model is so you kind of need to
understand what it's what it's working
on and and then we'll actually go into a
demonstration on EO modeler and lastly
director Java client there are other
sessions on this as well so what we're
going to do is simply launch an
application show you where the director
Java client assistant is and just do
some browsing of some information that
that will use early on earlier on in the
presentation okay
we'll also put this slide at the end
with some of the some of the key other
sessions but we think you should know
this now because other sessions we'll
talk about some of these things in
overlap a little bit and if you want to
find out if you find something in this
presentation that you really like you
may want to come to one of these
following following sessions so project
builder there are a number of sessions
going on with project builder I believe
the first ones already completed but
there will be a couple other ones on
debugging there will be a session on
direct to web with Miguel here web
objects builder will be covered again a
little bit in getting the most out of
web objects tools the le modeler will
be touched upon at a couple of other
sessions because it works with EOF so
the sessions on on EOF we'll be covering
that as well and direct to Java client
as I mentioned there's a direct to Java
client session and an advanced java
client session so mark those down if as
we go through this and we'll try and
give you the sample platter here of the
web objects tools okay
so let's build a common web app a common
question I get when I meet with
customers
is his web objects hard to use and I
used to say well there is a steep
learning curve and yes you know and I'd
say what Steve same--and said you learn
a lot in a short amount of time and you
know buh-buh-buh-buh-buh buhbuh
now I stopped and asked them before I
jump into that and say well it depends
what problem are you trying to solve and
when when customers start explaining
what kind of problems they're trying to
solve it all depends on you know and a
typical thing they're doing is they're
looking at a database and they're
creating reading update deleting the
standard kinds of things not a lot of
business logic a little bit of
customization in the HTML and that's
about it so you look at them and say
well we we have some frameworks and we
can probably do that with no code I
think oh really well but it goes across
this table and it has a too many
relationship and it goes across here on
a many-to-many and it does this and that
and here's our whole scheme on see how
hard it is and web objects has
frameworks in there to help you do that
to help you build an application that
does all this without having to write
code to do it it's only when you solve
the hard and the difficult problems that
you really have to drill to the depths
of web objects to do these kinds of
things okay so the following session
intro to EOF we'll begin to talk about
that a little bit we'll go into greater
depths of how do you use uof to solve
these hard problems that are out there
in the industry okay but a lot of these
problems aren't that hard so we'll show
you the the get started way on how to do
that the other thing I want to point out
is if you don't know by now wizards are
bad okay if you haven't heard that from
Steve Heymann or earlier or if you
haven't heard they're from somebody else
wizards when we think of wizards we
think of code generators wizards are
okay to kind of get you started and help
you out a little bit and project builder
has a little one just to sort of ask you
a few questions and just kind of help
you get started but if a wizard is going
to
generate a lot of code that's typically
a bad thing because who ends up
supporting that code yeah who's got to
support all the lines of code to this
gin and the first thing you're gonna do
is you're gonna look at that and you're
gonna go oh my gosh who wrote this stuff
and now I'm stuck here supporting it
okay so wizards in general are bad what
is better is two views pre-built
frameworks and to hook those and wire
those up so you see that metaphor in
interface builder you'll see that
metaphor in web logics builder you'll
see that metaphor in a lot of places and
things we do of hooking them up we we
traditionally use things like keyless
well now the in thing to say is
obviously XML but that's how we hook
these things up that's how we get
started with these so rather than you
doing a wizard we're gonna start a
directive web application I think you'll
see it's much more flexible than a
wizard okay so getting started with
project builder project builder is if
you don't know by now project builder is
the way to develop web objects
applications on Mac Mac OS 10 with web
objects 5 it is a new project builder if
you're a traditional web objects builder
and you've come along the way so there
are some things in there you'll need to
be aware of that are that are a little
bit different and we'll show those ok
project builder is that our integrated
development environment it also manages
other than just you know the standard
edit compile debug code it also manages
resources for you so we're creating
these model files where we've modeled a
database and we've got to store that
somewhere we've got to manage that
somewhere so that's included as a part
of the prod as a part of the product as
the part of the project excuse me
same thing with web objects builder
creates HTML and object descriptions
that bind to that it also manages those
it handles web server resources it
handles a number of other resources that
you have to deal with in a typical web
application it also handles launching
your applications and runtime parameters
when you launch those so that you can
test your applications
okay so the first thing we'll do in
project builder we need to select the
kind of project we're gonna build and as
a new developer told me recently the
beauty of getting started with web
objects is you launch project builder
and now you have 47,000 project types to
choose from which one okay so it is a
little difficult to pick the right one
or to know the right one so we'll kind
of help you through that process let you
kind of know how to get started but
direct to web think of direct I will
pick a direct to web product project
I think of direct to web as creating a
model file much in the same way that we
model a database a data dictionary or a
schema coming in from the database it's
a little bit different it's more of a
rules file really but you can think of
it as a little bit of abstraction from
the objects in our application so yo
modeler creates an abstraction from the
database it takes data rows and turns
them into objects that we like to
program in objects right and our model
here will take those objects and
basically describe how to present those
so we've now isolated ourselves both
ways a little bit from the user
interface wicket which can change very
quickly and from the database that can
change very quickly
okay so direct to web will give us by
default a standard login page nothing
too exciting there the web assistant
then connects up to this application
that we've launched and it'll allow us
to customize that on the fly so that's
what we're going to do we'll launch the
application and then we'll customize it
as we go along okay so what do people
use direct web for well traditionally a
few people have used it for doing things
like validating my model okay so I have
an object model from my database can I
get from my customers to my suppliers to
can I then can I go you know traverse
relationships can I Traverse key value
coding through all this stuff to get
through all these relationships and make
my application work the way it should so
it's just you can use it as a validation
tool that yeah this actually has you
know all the relationships that I need
in my model it's also very useful for
creating administrative apps so how many
of you developed an app and you get done
and somebody says well we've got to have
a way for you know our secretaries to
get information into the system and you
don't want to sit there and do a quick
you know quick application or something
so you can just throw it into directory
web and hand it over immediately okay so
that's another use but what we'd like to
do is customize it just a little bit
more and begin to show you how you can
actually use this as a real live running
application not just for admin apps and
not just for pumping data into the
application okay again wizard bad
remember that we're gonna build a new
project so this is what you'll do
anytime you're building a web objects
application again here's the 47,000
choices that you have we will select a
director web application and we'll name
this hap our school okay these are the
pre-built frameworks that web objects
includes if i've got other ones such as
when Steve Heymann built his
demonstration yesterday wanted to add in
a few other frameworks you can do this
upfront if you know you're going to
going to want to include some pre-built
code that either your company's
developed or maybe Apple I services is
developed for you to add a model for
right now we're just going to kind of
pass the model off until later in the
presentation
just just consider it some magic
somebody has handed you on how to
connect up to your database okay so we
choose our model and now we have a
couple of looks in director web will
choose the neutral look but we can
change this in the rules at any time if
you want to change the look and feel
and I'm not going to build and launch
right now because I want to show you a
few things before it takes off okay so
there's project builder for those of you
that weren't here yesterday and saw the
new project builder this is what it
looks like it manages as we said a
number of things it manages your classes
so we give you by default you have an
application class in a session class
indirect actions direct actions which is
how you handle some of the get methods
that you use and other tools it also
handles web components and components
are the richer set of things on how web
objects can interact with the user in a
much more powerful manner so it does
sound some of the same things you could
do in previous versions of project
builder I can look at the HTML and so
you know obviously if if I want to
change things in here I can I but it's
probably much easier to bring it up in
web objects builder okay there are three
components that it gave me a main a menu
header and a page wrapper so it's going
to already we're using a couple of
reusable things of components can be
embedded inside of each other and I can
modify those and it'll be modified in
all my applications so it's very nice
it's a very nice starting point
resources as we mentioned are models
such as my database model that somebody
handed me other kinds of things it also
has a rules file okay this is another
nice thing that web objects does for you
in a lot of environments where you don't
have as rich of tools as well objects
you would have to go in here by hand and
edit these things or come up with some
kind of crude tool to do this we'll show
you we won't have to mess with this
directly there's also a rule setter
which Miguel will probably cover in his
session but we'll have tools to manage
this so that you don't have to go in
there and muck with it by hand web
server resources if we have web server
resources things that need
go with the HTTP server and and be
copied over there to be vended that's
where they're all go and then the
frameworks that I just included again if
I want to include some other as after
I've started up this is where I would
put them okay so that's our application
hammer means build so we're building the
application if you want to take a look
at what is spewing out of here you'll
notice that it's not make anymore it's
now Jam using Jam to build the files and
it's built the other thing is kind of
new if you're if you're just walking up
to project builder and you're like most
guys I admitted that don't want to take
read the manual or listen to your wife
and pull in a gas station to get
directions you go to enough of these
sessions we'll all give you one or two
tips and you'll learn project builder
here executables there we go that's much
better thank you
- whoa porch auto open in browser no ok
you can also enter in a number of other
things in there like I said we will need
to build this application right now ok
when the build target is done we can
launch it now and that should go a
little bit okay as I mentioned there are
a number of parameters you can set when
you launch this and those all show up
here so you can see where my port is set
and these are all in red here the
runtime parameters that you can set here
they used to be a separate panel so get
used to that a little bit of the of the
moving panels as we go here okay our
application is ready okay
all right there we go okay so the
default page in a directory web
application is a query all and query all
just says take all the entities that you
had in that database thing that somebody
handed you and pick one thing and put it
in there take a good guess okay so it
takes a pretty good guess on these
things of course course name where
course name begins with B okay I can go
out and search boom there's my my
courses in my course database for my
school okay
anytime we hit home we go back to the
main page okay well we can also begin to
customize this a little bit so if you're
building your first app you're probably
not going to do the full insert update
delete all this kind of stuff with
multiple tables and a big thing okay if
you've got web objects out of the box
how many of you got the book out that
said getting started okay so the getting
started book is probably how you got
started right you did guestbook and then
you did a simple movies demo okay
so when you do a movies demo or get
started that way usually you're only
querying on one or at most two entities
okay and then we're traversing down a
path okay so I don't want to make this
quite so complex and yeah okay but I'll
show you as we go through this there's
two ways actually of doing this I can
launch it in the browser which is a
simpler way and once the browser is
getting meshed up with the underlying
java code that's that's in the mrj
they'll be able to deal with this much
better but for now we will walk this
fine
as I walk off the edge of the stage here
so it's gonna be a little tight here but
let's let's see what happens okay that's
good so the query all page is the
default page it doesn't have a
customization but I'm going to customize
the entities as we said we can customize
the entities and the tasks that are
involved in this app okay so picture
your manager or your coworker working on
this and saying okay well I can make all
those read-only what's that that's gonna
change a little bit now I can also take
course I probably only want to look at
for now let's pick courses and students
okay and let's save that off okay reload
boom okay so now I've only got two
I've cut that down to two entities the
others are hidden so there were three
categories here if you can read the tiny
font it's hidden entities read-only
entities and readwrite okay so now I've
got to that's a good start okay so let's
look at students and let's look at
students whose last name begins with B
okay so we've got a number of them I
don't like first name in front of last
name so again I can go into the
assistant and now I'm going to go into
expert mode okay so if I look at the
properties of this page
okay I've got first name and I've got
last name in here and I can customize
that to some extent by selecting last
name it's moving it up a notch so
that'll come first but you'll notice if
you were yesterday's session Steve
talked a little Steve Heymann talked a
little bit about key value coding and
going across relationships that come
from our model that students have a 2:1
relationship to photo so I can select
photo dot photo and move this into my
application or move this into my page
and notice direct to web is smart enough
to figure out the attributes that are
there I can save this and let's check
our browser again ah it looks much nicer
although a motley crue they be don't
they
okay some of you may recognize a few of
those faces we'll have a quiz later
okay so that'll be our student list page
okay so we can move through this
application one by one picking off all
the different kinds of things so this is
what we can do we can go in here and
select and fix the user interface for
courses and for students and we'll map
down until those things cross over until
I look at students and all the courses
that they're taking so why don't we do
that
okay in this list page I've also got
courses okay
so I can move courses over here and I
can inspect it okay I can do a two mini
table and maybe what I want to list is
specifically the course name so let's
save that and take a look at what we
have okay so it's collapsing the courses
let's clean that up save again okay so
now I have the students and I've crossed
a many-to-many relationship and I can
list the courses okay so I haven't done
any coding yet still I'm just
configuring basically the rules on how
we're mapping from models to
applications okay so if I look at let's
sort these by last name by clicking on
the icon I can sort them let's look at a
course okay basic circuits inspection
looks like it could use a little work so
let's go back home and clean up another
one okay so let's look at courses we've
been cleaned up some of the student
pages let's clean up some of the source
the courses pages alright okay alright
so here's the courses let's take it
looks like in here cost is free
obviously this is a free University so
let's take out some of these things will
leave in name and let's leave in
instructor name and save that and reload
and that looks a little better
okay let's sort them like that and I can
do the same thing here so I can list in
this list page I can actually list all
the students that are in that page as
well and traverse the relationship so
there's a relationship called
again I'm crossing the barriers from one
table to another to do this in another
tool normally you'd be writing sequel
joins and and joining tables and having
to deal with all this stuff let's put it
in a table again and let's display their
last name and let's save it okay okay
there we go okay so now I can begin to
loop a little bit I can look at
individuals let's look let's clean up
one more thing let's clean up the
inspection for students and let's clean
up the inspection for courses so I don't
like the fact that it lists seven
courses that looks kind of ugly so I'll
go back to my web assistant
let's put takeout enrolled let's take a
last name and bubble it up first name
I'm bubbling this up
[Music]
let's take photo and actually I want to
move that out and traverse the
relationship for photo again
so as I'm inspecting a student will
display their photo both in the list
page and in the inspection page okay
let's add that make it an image okay
and in the courses we're gonna select
the course name okay all right save that
reload there we go one more thing I'm
not a big fan of collapsing all right so
let's not allow collapsing there we go
cleaning it up one more time okay all
right so now we basically have an
application that I can take a student
look at their courses go across to the
courses I need to clean up the inspect
courses so that I can display who's all
in the course so let's synchronize that
and this is always one that can that is
fun to do because we can sometimes as
this application goes along we can go a
bit too quick and actually bind it up
but let's give it a shot here
okay so we'll keep horses and we'll keep
horse instructor there we go okay
okay that looks too simple let's go back
and add students
and let's put a table in there that has
a student's last name okay
okay here we go okay so this is our
application right now okay
I can search on students I can search on
courses and I can traverse all the
relationships and get all the
information about both of those so as I
look at students in classes I can say I
can go to other classes I can see who's
in those classes and etc okay that's
first part that we're going to build so
I will launch into customizing the HTML
a little bit let's try and let's try to
make this look a little bit prettier so
it doesn't look quite as much as a
direct to web app okay so we can use web
objects builder on everything I built up
till this point to customize the HTML
both in the page wrapper and in the menu
that's along the side okay so I can
clean those things up make it look like
an app make it look like my app instead
of making it look like an out-of-the-box
app okay we can do things like also
freezing pages as well so if I want to
go in there I can freeze this out and
have a standard web objects component
instead of having and make be totally
dynamic okay so I can go in there and
customize even more if I choose to do
that so we'll go in here and fix alt or
change all three will change the login
panel a little bit we'll change the menu
wrapper a little bit and we'll change
the header a little bit okay and we'll
show off some of the things with web
objects builder
well budgets builder is the way that you
edit HTML in web objects as Steve
mentioned yesterday if you want to deal
with the with the files that web objects
builder normally deals with you can use
anything but we think it's easiest to
use in web objects builder for a couple
of reasons okay it edits your HTML but
it uses a standard metaphor that we have
of objects and object browser on the
bottom and what we're doing is we're
binding those objects to the HTML okay
the only tag you'll see in the HTML from
us is the web objects tag so we really
try and stay out of there and instead we
try and dynamically bind
bind these objects with with minimal
impact on the HTML web objects builder
also has built-in integration as you saw
yesterday in Steve Hammonds presentation
we can drag entities from AO modeler
into web objects builder and it'll
automatically create a display group
object for us in order to connect up to
the backend it also web objects builder
also has integration with project
builder so if I'm changing code in web
objects builder in automatically and
instantaneously updates in project
builder okay
so let's take a look at that and
customize that a little bit okay if we
can go back to the demo machine okay so
here are my web components you can see I
have three as I said before nobody stood
up good
okay I click on those to launch web
objects builder and let's go ahead and
bring up all three and then we can just
move project over to the background okay
alright first let's take a look at our
login page that we had our main page
okay so remember we said web objects
builder has the HTML part on the top and
the object part on the bottom I can
browse objects you'll find the general
design pattern of browsing and browsing
objects to be a standard thing is one of
my favorite developers I'm from Boulder
Colorado it's one of my favorite
developers says it's all simply a matter
of browsing you can browse everything so
he wrote a tool that browses the Oracle
schema and browses the objective-c
runtime and it's all just browsing he
says so that's all we're doing here on
the bottom is we can look at the
application objects session objects
below the line our methods or actions
that I've got so my main dot java has a
default page action which probably is
bound to the login panel okay so I'm
going to clean up the table a little bit
as we've shown you a little bit before
you can see the HTML along the bottom
the depths of the HTML path along the
bottom so if I want to look at this
table row right here or if I want to
look at what is included in a form a web
objects form I can look at that level so
it's very handy it's also very handy
when you're tying methods to objects you
can bind here or I can bind as I drag
from my object so bind to the HTML
either place okay very handy sometimes
if you have some complex HTML much
easier to deal with in that in that
fashion okay all right let's take a look
at a table row here let's get rid of the
assistant part because I'm not really
going to
have now that our app is looking pretty
good we're probably going to not need
the assistant anymore let's take and
center that and let's look for an image
that we have laying just happen to have
a laying around education web objects
and when I drag an image or any other
kind of resource into my application
it's going to ask me do you want to add
this as a global resource okay so yes I
do it adds it as a global resource to my
product project okay so I can save that
I can also look at what this page looks
like in the raw HTML okay notice what I
had highlighted here whatever I happen
to highlight here as I move over
highlights here so well object name
equals education web objects okay so it
named that right there in the HTML and I
can easily again if I'm having trouble
finding something embedded in a table I
can click on it here and switch between
views and actually see where that is
where it's highlighted okay I can also
get somewhat of a view of what it's
going to look like as a best guess in
the rendering in the HTML okay there are
palettes as Steve mentioned yesterday he
has many more palettes than I do but you
can drag and drop other things off the
palettes into here if I had this image
on a pallet already it would be
something that I could just drag into my
product project and bind up the dynamic
things that web objects includes or on
the bottom row here so as you hold your
mouse above those you can see all the
kinds of things that we can bind up to
web objects and I can also add other
variables or keys and it does this in a
very smart way so if I want to add a key
such as let's call it a course okay and
it's a class this will list all the
different kind of classes I have access
to but it's not just the standard object
types it also figures out and
substitutes in things like courses that
come from my ye'll model okay so it
understands how to connect up to the
database and include these things in my
application okay when I add that my
course object now understands what are
the attributes that it's pulling from
our model of a course of course has
category cost course name other kinds of
things
it also has relationships that I can
traverse so I can traverse course
summary and the name of the summary and
bind that to different things okay as
you saw in Steve's demo yesterday okay
so we'll delete that okay so there's
many powerful things you can do with web
objects builder we'll keep that as our
main page and let's go on to some of the
other reusable components that are in
our application okay so you'll notice on
the page there's a menu header and a
component side okay so this is the page
wrapper it's an object that we use in in
web objects in order to get reuse on a
lot of our pages very quickly so I can
wrap this page and the page any page in
this page wrapper and it gets all to be
all the settings in there for free
when I drag the image in again it says
do you want to replace since I've
already put this in the resources I know
that I've got something in there by that
name do you want to replace it or you
want to just use it let's just use it
okay
so we'll include that in our page
wrapper we'll call that one good save
that okay now our last page is the menu
on the side okay
it's a read-only application so we're
not going to insert anything new so
again I can select anything that I have
in web objects builder and simply delete
it okay we probably don't want to
customize anymore
notice I can see on the tagline that
that's what I'm trying to delete we can
delete that as well okay let's save that
and let's keep this one open so we can
show you how this can modify on the fly
or how we can do other kinds of things
okay so that's web objects builder in a
very short time frame let's launch our
project again over rebuild and launch
and let's take a look with what we have
okay
so here's our new login panel we can
clean this up however you want but this
certainly looks better than than what I
started with foo bar again to my
super-secret Apple connect login panel
okay so now I can search there's one
thing I not wild about in here it says
entities if you can see it in the upper
left
so entities doesn't probably mean
anything to most of the teachers in my
school so let's take a look in web
objects builder I don't see it it's hard
to see again in the HTML so this is one
of those instances where it's kind of
nice to go into web objects builder raw
mode and I can search on entities and
there it is and let's change this to
looking for okay so it's handy sometimes
they have the raw HTML there as well so
I can search for difficult things that
are hidden and again do I have to
recompile this app now no because it's
all dynamic on the fly and notice it's
looking for I can look for courses I can
look for students okay let's look for
again courses okay there's my courses
basic circuits and I can traverse my
relationships okay
not a bad app for how many minutes okay
about a half an hour at most I wasn't
talking so much I could probably do it
about five okay thanks
okay so you can begin to see the power
of what we can do with these tools and
yet we're building these straightforward
apps without developing any code and we
can do this very rapidly but yet not
lose the power of web objects underneath
so we haven't taken away any of the
incredible power that a lot of serious
developers that have been using this for
a long time understand is lying
underneath the covers so what a great
way to get started with a tool that
isn't going to hit the ceiling as soon
as we walk away from this application
okay so to talk a little bit more I've
kind of abstracted away from where this
information all came from so in order to
talk about that I'm gonna bring out Dan
Montana no Joe Moreno to talk about eel
modeler thank you afternoon I'm Joe
Bereta with Apple I services about two
minutes to 2:00 this afternoon I was in
the web objects lab someone came up to
me and said hey Joe aren't you doing
introduction to web objects tools and I
said why yes and they said well that
begins in two minutes so obviously it
was wrong but about it had a heart
attack thinking I was gonna make it over
here on time for about the next 15
minutes or maybe even short if I can
squeeze it in I'm gonna talk about eel
modeler but I can't tell you what a
modeler does unless you know what an eel
model is so it's gonna be more on eel
model what an eel model is Neal model
provides persistent data store
connectivity it Maps data into objects
and it defines relationships and these
circles that you see these disks the red
disks with the yellow circles those
represent Yoos if you've never seen that
before
all in EO is is a Java object in memory
absolutely no difference with exception
that an EO connotates the data came from
say a row in a database table
ichiro model web objects app connects to
a specific data source so in your web
objects application you can have
multiple data connections now it does
not have to be a relational database it
could be a flat file it could be XML or
it could be screen scraping but for the
rest of my little talk here I'm just
gonna go nice option we're talking to a
relational database system alright also
any ole model will map data at runtime
into particular data types example here
is a VAR char would become a Java long
string and int would become a Java line
num it doesn't have to happen like this
but that's generally what makes sense
this is the connection dictionary
inspector which I will show you on my
demo so if you can see it in the back
all it has is the connection dictionary
information we're using JDBC open base
and then the URL where you find the
database there's usually doesn't have to
be but there is usually a one-to-one
mapping between a database table and a
neo or a Java class in your project and
this is where you can see the mapping
provided a student entity or student
database in your database table maps to
a student al very intuitive makes sense
also again it provides the mapping
between columns and geo attributes also
creates templates for you you will click
a button and it will generate a Java
file for you which will go into your
project this is what the file looks like
the its this isn't the whole file but
the top part there shows the setter and
together for last name and first name
and then below that white line is where
you start implementing your custom logic
for example very simple custom method
here is full name it's the one we always
use for some reason and all it does is
return first-name plus a space Plus
fastening
also in any old model you define
relationships you define to one
relationships you can define to many
relationships just like you do in a
database one other thing that's I think
is a big win with any old models you can
define a many-to-many
now even though your database doesn't
support the many to many you can in
memory following too many relationship
and it just works like magic where the
middle table which is in the database is
sort of hidden so you don't even have to
pretend it you can ignore it like your
appendix or something all right you can
also define relationship rules alright
like delete rules cascade deny nullify
no action cascade that's a big one
cascade you have a student object and it
has let's say a one to one to a photo
every student has one and only one photo
when I delete the student it doesn't
make sense to keep the photo object in a
database anymore that's how you get off
orphaned rows in your child database
tables so you can tell ill modeler that
when I delete a student didn't write the
sequel also to delete the photo you can
do deny nullify no action propagate
primary key in a one-to-one relationship
again between student and photo when I
inserts a new student it makes sense
already go ahead and insert a row into
the photo table and then join them
across the same primary key so basically
the primary key is propagated and also
owns destination it's a little more
advanced but and again an example of
student to photo if in memory you you
can create read update delete your
standard crud with Yeo's one thing you
can do is you hook them up into
relationships and you unhook them when
you unhook them if one owns the
destination and you don't rehook it up
it gets deleted from the database which
may be what you want here are some
things that yo modeler the tool
specifically can do they can reverse
engineer database schemas into a Neal
model which we've done quite a few times
probably wants a session so far
generates sequel to create or sync
database schema
this is good if you don't know SQL like
I don't know SQL - well so I just use
the OL modeler to cheat it can
graphically create fetch specs in the
next session there the next session is
they're going to talk about fetch specs
all effects spec is is a query on a
database and you can do it
programmatically in your java code again
this doesn't mean you have to put sequel
in there but you can generate a fetch
spec programmatically in your code or
you can store it graphically in your ill
model allows importing and exporting of
data modeler can import from a flat file
into a database or can export into a
flat file these flat files we call pea
lists or property lists and you can also
browse live data eel models just the tip
of the iceberg though there's a whole
layer of middleware between your web
objects application and the database and
this whole area of middleware we call
AOF Enterprise objects frameworks and
basically your real model works with AOF
to keep a OS Java objects in memory
synchronize with the database and vice
versa you make a change to a Java object
in memory that represents a neo when you
say save changes that sequels go into
the database and here's an example of
just how simple it is to get data from a
database in your java code change it and
then save it to the database the first
line there it's basically saying give me
all the students with the last name
Smith so you get an array of objects
back the next one is we're gonna take
the first object object at index zero
and we're going to change it from Smith
to Jones and then the last line we're
gonna save changes now that editing
context is basically just a bucket that
your data goes into and it watches for
changes and then updates the database
that you'll get some more exposure to in
the next session after this so this is
the key a neo model provides a layer of
abstraction that minimizes the cost of
change as we switch over to the demo I'm
just going to comment that we've all
experienced change in requirements
it's management's fault or for technical
reasons things just change then pay our
bills so when we do here is open a neo
model and reverse engineering correct
I'm gonna open a database and reverse
engineered into a neo model like you've
seen so many times before
around the database and we're not gonna
do anything with primary keys they're
not gonna be any relationships it's just
going to be any old model of tables so
these are the tables first thing is the
connection dictionary this is what you
saw in the slide earlier this shows you
have the database and you know the le
model talks to the database this is the
URL right here and that's the database
that it found and you can have your
login and password here and you can go
right in here and change it so now we're
gonna flip over to the diagram view and
we're going to focus on two entities the
student and the photo that we were
talking about earlier there's a student
there's a photo we didn't tell it to
assign primary keys I'm gonna go in here
sign talent ID is a primary key and
talent ID this is what I really like I
always forget where the foreign key goes
you know well now I know it goes onto
too many side but I used to forget and I
joined the relationships wrong when I
did inspect them so now I just click
here and then drag over to the other one
now it won't let me connect to photo
because photo is a different data type
than talent ID but it will let me
connect to talent ID brings up this
inspector which I'm going to minimize
close for now and you see it's actually
joined the two date of the two tables
and there's actual real data behind
these you can browse them and if there
was real data there we go
yeah there's real data behind them so
the next thing you do is save your real
model it's gonna give me a warning I
know because I haven't gone through and
made it all copacetic but I'll just save
it in my home directory with the unique
intuitive name and now I'm gonna
generate a Java class all right so I'm
highlighting the student entity I'm just
gonna turn this off which will explain
in a later session what I just did and
we won't click on the Java here I didn't
give it a name so it's gonna assume to
use student Java make sense and it
generated a student dot Java file I go
my file system go home here's my student
Java I can show you what it looks like
real quick in a really large font
it puts setters and getters for the
first name and a last name now one thing
you'll notice is that's the only line of
code that actually goes to the database
and pulls out the data there is no
sequel in there and then again down here
we would just start putting in your
custom your custom business logic such
as full name
and the last thing I mentioned I don't
know sequel so if I was generating this
schema any old modeler and there was no
database under it I can very simply come
here and just click on this sequel panel
here let me turn everything off to show
you explicitly what it's doing it will
create the tables that you want there's
a sequel and this depends on what type
of database you're connected to it'll
give you primary key constraints primary
key support etc and this depends on
again which database you're talking to
and it generate the whole schema for you
so that concludes my portion of the talk
I'm going to turn it back over to Barry
let's talk about direct to web thank you
[Applause]
okay we have just enough time to talk
about directed Java client a little bit
direct to Java client is similar to
direct web but it has a swing UI
interface okay so it's not using the
browser it's a pure java application it
gives you a little bit of a richer
experience than the limitations of the
web
again it's very rapid development for
these kinds of apps and the thing to
remember about this is that it's
probably easiest to deploy these apps on
Mac OS 10 okay because we've got this
great Java platform that you've probably
been hearing about in other sessions and
you're guaranteed to have Java there if
you deploy this app on the steam-powered
Babbage engine or the as/400 of the
system 390 or something you'd you know
it depends on the Java that runs on that
environment on the client because you're
not relying on the browser okay
so you're a little bit you know you have
to make sure that the clients that are
going to connect up to this but we think
we have a great platform for you to
develop and deploy these kinds of
applications very rapidly so web objects
is not strictly limited to an HTML
presentation you've also got a swing UI
interface to this okay so let's go right
to a very simple demo that we're gonna
do
let's build a new project okay and it's
going to be a directed java client
application we'll call it my school -
okay I'm going to add one additional
framework here that just simply sets up
some parameters for me it's called the
Java client class loader so it'll it'll
allow me to run this app much quicker
let's run the pic the model again the
model is courses so we use the same
model that we were using before except
now we're going to display it in swing
so we can build and launch this
application one of the things that that
was set up there for me
normally this would go ahead and launch
it in the browser I'm actually going to
launch the Java Java client launcher
okay so it's going to launch us in a
pure Java form it can also vend this
through the browser so that if you do
have to suck down swing classes it can
actually do that for you but in this
case we're not going to launch a browser
okay so let's go ahead and connect up to
our running application right now and
we'll show you in a bit what that looks
like okay so it's the same logic
everything that the same model that
wasn't my application before and let's
get rid of some other things and here it
is okay so it's the same kind of thing
we were doing but now it's available to
me in swing so any any platform that
would have Java on it can run this let's
look for last names again just to show
you that we are live and connected up
here's my last names and let's look for
similar kind of name one of the things
this allows me to do is bring up other
kinds of windows okay so I don't need to
be I don't need to stay within frames or
the windows I can have multiple windows
I can click on other other people in my
application and I can have multiple
windows open
same time okay same thing that we had
before I've got the tools but now
instead of a Java applet this is what
the assistant looks like so I can
customize this if I want to get rid of
facility and I want to get rid of
instructor I can apply that and restart
okay okay so now you can see I've
restarted and I've got ridden to the
tabs and now I have the exact same
application running in a pure swing UI
environment ok that's it if we can go
back to the slides
okay so if you're interested in checking
out these tools we would encourage you
to come to the web objects labs here's
the times here's the hours it's a great
lab it's much cleaner and doesn't make
your hands stink as much as it could
they ever lab so it's a lot of fun okay
the roadmap as I mentioned before I
mentioned a lot more of the courses
these are come some of the highlights
stick around for introduction to uof
should be very interesting and these are
some of the other ones that are the rest
of the week okay
people to contact at Apple again Tony
trio Veon and Bob our new product
manager who I believe is misspelled his
last name on the slides here
you